What is node js?

Node js is open source ,cross platform runtime environment for javascript allow developers to run javascript outside their broswers.
Features :-

* Non-Blocking i/o
* Event driven
* Single threaded
* Asynchronous


What is a blocking?

A task is said to be blocking when it stops the thread from executing other tasks and make it wait until the current task is completed.


what is a non blocking task?

A task is said to be non blocking when it can execute other tasks without having to wait for the completion of the current task.and it can process task in the background.

























































































































Process:-

A process is an instance of a running program .js runtime and libuv which is being executed.Process is a global object in node js that provides information about , and control over, the current node.js process.
Process has its own memory ,created when node file.js is ran , works independently.Processes communicate through inter-process communication (IPC) mechanisms.
eg:- process.event
     process.pid  

Threads(worker thread):-

Threads is a smaller unit of execution within a process.
Worker threads are used to run heavy computational tasks(sync) without blocking the main thread.
Each worker has its own  js heap and event loop
Worker thread creates a seperate thread which works paralelly independently inside the same process.
It communicate with the process through messages and shared memory.
Threads share the same memory space and resources of the process(parent) they belong to and it has its own memory as well.
In Node.js, you can create multiple threads within a process using the worker_threads module.


In node js the child process are created to run blocking tasks without interrupting the primary/parent process as a seperate process.

Child process:- 

Child process are specifically used for running high computational and blocking tasks seperately from the parent process.
Node js can spawn additional process(using child_process).
they are seperate instances of node js that runs paralelly and communicate with the parent process.


Spawn:- 

Spawn method creates a new process with a seperate thread which can execute both node js scripts and external commands which are responsible for communicating with the external systems.
only new v8 instace is created for nodejs scripts only not for external commands so nodejs instance with a new thread will be there.
It communicates with the parent process through standard i/o streams.

Fork:- 

Fork is a special method of spawn which is used to create child process to execute node js scripts
It creates a seperate instance with a new main thread.
It default uses IPC channel to interact with parent process.


Stream:-

Stream is an abstract interface for handling with streaming data.
Instead of sending the data as a huge bundle the data is often send as packets/chunks.



